---
title: 'kuibit: Analyzing Einstein Toolkit simulations with Python'
tags:
  - Python
  - Einstein Toolkit
  - Cactus
  - numerical relativity
  - astrophysics
authors:
  - name: Gabriele Bozzola
    orcid: 0000-0003-3696-6408
    affiliation: "1"
affiliations:
 - name: Steward Observatory and Astronomy Department, University of Arizona
   index: 1
date: 1 January 2021
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

`kuibit` [^0][^3] is a Python library for analyzing simulations performed with
the `Einstein Toolkit`[^1] [@einsteintoolkit, @einsteintoolkit2], a free and
open-source code for numerical relativity and relativistic astrophysics. Over
the past years, numerical simulations like the ones enabled by the `Einstein
Toolkit` have become a critical tool in modeling, predicting, and understanding
several astrophysical phenomena, including binary black hole or neutron star
mergers. As a result of the recent detections of gravitational waves by the
LIGO-Virgo collaboration, these studies are at the forefront of scientific
research. The package presented in this paper, `kuibit`, provides an intuitive
infrastructure to read and represent the output of the `Einstein Toolkit`. This
simplifies analyzing simulations and significantly lowers the barrier in
learning how to use the tool.

# Statement of need

The `Einstein Toolkit` is based on the `Cactus` computational framework and it
is designed to be accessible for both users and developers. Numerical-relativity
simulations require large and complex codes, which have to run on the worldâ€™s
largest supercomputers. `Einstein Toolkit` improve accessibility by splitting
infrastructure code from physics one. On one side, there is memory management,
parallelization, grid operations, and all the other low-level details that are
needed to successfully perform a simulation but do not strictly depend on the
physical system under consideration. On the other, there are the physics
modules, which implement the scientific aspects of the simulation. Codes are
developed by domain-experts and researchers can focus on their goals without
having to worry about the low-level details of the implementation. This makes
`Einstein Toolkit` easier to use and to extend, as all the low-level engineering
details are hidden to most users.

Despite the advancements made by `Einstein Toolkit`, there is still a big leap
between running a simulation and obtaining scientific results. The output from
the `Einstein Toolkit` is a collection of files with different formats and
structures, with data that is typically spread across multiple files (one or
more for each MPI process) in various directories (one per checkpoint). Reading
the simulation output and properly combining all the data is a challenging task.
Even once the output is read, traditional data structures are not a good
representation of the physical quantities. For instance, representing variables
defined on an adaptive-mesh-refined grid as simple arrays completely ignores all
the information on the grid structure, making some operations impractical or
impossible to perform. The lack of suitable interfaces introduces significant
friction in exploring the scientific content of a simulation. `kuibit` takes
care of both the aspects of reading the simulation data and of providing
high-level representations of the data that closely follows what researchers are
used to. In addition to this, `kuibit` also includes a set of routines that are
commonly used in the field: for example, it handles unit conversion (including
from geometrized units to physical), it has the noise curves of known detectors,
or it computes gravitational-waves from simulation data.

`kuibit` is based on the same design (and in various cases, implementation
details too) of a pre-existing package named `PostCactus` [^4]. Like
`PostCactus`, `kuibit` has two groups of modules. The first is to define custom
data-types for time series, Fourier spectra, multipolar decompositions, and grid
data (both on uniform grids and mesh-refined ones). The second group consists of
the readers, which are a collection of tools to scan the simulation output and
organize it. The main reader is a class `SimDir` which provides the interface to
access all the data in the simulation. For instance, the `timeseries` attribute
in `SimDir` is a dictionary-like object that contains all the time series in the
output. When reading data, `kuibit` takes care of all the low-level details,
like handling transparently simulation restarts, or merging grid data stored in
different files. Therefore, users can easily access the data regardless of how
complicated the structure of the output is.

`kuibit` embraces the core principles of the `Einstein Toolkit`: On one side,
`kuibit` solves the engineering problems of reading and representing `Einstein
Toolkit` data, so that researchers can directly pursue their scientific goals
without having to worry about how the data is stored. With `kuibit`, the entry
barrier into using the `Einstein Toolkit` is the lowest it has ever been, and
students and researchers can inspect and visualize simulations in just a few
lines of code. On the other side, `kuibit` is designed to be a code for the
community: it is free and does not require any proprietary software to run [^2],
it is openly developed with an emphasis on readability and maintainability, and
it encourages contributions.

# Acknowledgments

Gabriele Bozzola is supported by the Frontera Fellowship by the Frontera
Fellowship by the Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC). Frontera is founded by
NSF grant OAC-1818253. Gabriele Bozzola wishes to thank Wolfgang Kastaun for
publicly releasing his `PostCactus` package [^4] without which, `kuibit` would
not exist.

# References

[^0]: A kuibit (harvest pole) is the tool traditionally used by the Tohono
O'odham people to reach the fruit of the Saguaro cacti during the harvesting
season.

[^1]: While `kuibit` is designed for the `Einstein Toolkit`, most of its
capabilities will work also for all the other codes based on `Cactus`. For
instance, it is known that `kuibit` can be used to analyze `Illinois GRMHD`
[@illinoisgrmhd] simulations.

[^2]: Capabilities similar to those of `kuibit` are offered by `SimulationTools`
[@simulationtools], which is a Wolfram Mathematica package.

[^3]: [https://github.com/Sbozzolo/kuibit](https://github.com/Sbozzolo/kuibit)

[^4]: [https://github.com/wokast/PyCactus](https://github.com/wokast/PyCactus)


